---
title: Core Concepts
description:
  Learn essential Solana blockchain concepts including accounts, transactions,
  programs, program derived addresses, cross program invocations, and how tokens
  work on Solana.
---

To build on Solana, it's essential to understand key concepts unique to Solana
development. This section covers the core concepts you need to understand as you
start building on Solana, including accounts, transactions, programs, and more.

## Accounts

All data on the Solana blockchain is stored as an Account. The structure of the
Solana blockchain resembles a key-value store, in which the key is the on-chain
address and the value is an Account.

Learn more about [Accounts](/docs/core/accounts).

## Transactions and Instructions

To interact with the Solana network, a user must send a transaction. A
transaction is a set of one or more instructions—an instruction is a specific
operation to be processed. The execution logic for an instruction is stored on a
program deployed to the Solana network.

Learn more about [Transactions](/docs/core/transactions) and
[Instructions](/docs/core/transactions#instruction).

## Fees

There are three different types of fees that can be incurred when using the
Solana blockchain:

- **Transaction Fees**: A fee to have validators process transactions &
  instructions
- **Prioritization Fees**: An optional fee to boost a transaction's processing
  order
- **Rent**: A withheld balance to keep data stored on-chain

Learn more about [Fees on Solana](/docs/core/fees).

## Programs on Solana

On Solana, smart contracts are called Programs. Each program is stored in an
on-chain account and contains executable code with specific instructions. These
instructions represent the program's functionality and are invoked by sending a
transaction to the network.

Learn more about [Programs on Solana](/docs/core/programs).

## Program Derived Address

Program-derived addresses (PDAs) allow developers to create hashmap-like
structures on-chain using a predefined set of inputs (e.g. strings, numbers, and
other account addresses). PDAs allow for two important use cases:

- **Deterministic Account Addresses**: Predefined inputs (seeds) and a program
  ID are combined to deterministically derive an address.
- **Program Signing**: A Solana programs can sign for PDAs, which are derived
  from its program ID.

Learn more about [Program Derived Address](/docs/core/pda).

## Cross-program Invocation

Cross-program invocation (CPI) occurs when one program invokes an instruction
from another. This allows for the composability of Solana programs. To
conceptualize the concept, imagine a program's set of instructions as a set of
API endpoints. A CPI occurs when one endpoint invokes another.

Learn more about [Cross Program Invocation](/docs/core/cpi).

## Tokens

Tokens are digital assets that represent ownership over diverse categories of
assets. Tokenization enables the digitalization of property rights—a fundamental
component for managing fungible and non-fungible assets.

- **Fungible Tokens**: Interchangeable and divisible assets of the same type and
  value (ex. USDC).
- **Non-fungible Tokens (NFT):** Ownership of indivisible assets (e.g. artwork).

Learn more about [Tokens on Solana](/docs/core/tokens).

## Clusters and Endpoints

The Solana blockchain has several different groups of validators, known as
[Clusters](/docs/references/clusters). Each clusters serves a different purpose
and contains dedicated nodes to fulfill [JSON-RPC](/docs/rpc/) requests. There
are three primary clusters on the Solana network, shown in the table below.

| Name    | Endpoint                              | Use                       |
| ------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| Mainnet | `https://api.mainnet-beta.solana.com` | Production                |
| Devnet  | `https://api.devnet.solana.com`       | Developer experimentation |
| Testnet | `https://api.testnet.solana.com`      | Validator testing         |

Learn more about [Clusters and Endpoints](/docs/references/clusters).
